

			    Multi-sectoral Development Programme (MsDP)


		MsDP is a special development scheme designed to address the 'development 
	deficits' seen in Minority Concentration Districts. MsDP has been identified as 
	one of the Core of the Core Schemes under National Development Agenda in the Report
	of the Sub-Group of Chief Ministers on Rationalization of Centrally Sponsored Schemes,
	which was constituted by NITI Aayog.

		The programme was launched in the year 2008-09 in 90 identified Minority 
	Concentration Districts (MCDs) having at least 25% minority population and below 
	national average with respect to one or both of the backwardness parameters with the 
	objective of developing assets for socio-economic and basic amenities. The MCDs were 
	identified on the basis of census 2001 data. The programme continued during 11th 
	Five Year Plan.

		The MsDP was restructured in June 2013 for implementation during 12th Five 
	Year Plan and the area of implementation was replaced by Minority Concentration 
	Blocks (MCB), Minority Concentration Towns (MCT) and Clusters of Villages. Total MCBs
	- 710, MCTs - 66 in 196 Districts.The MsDP is currently in operation in 27 States/UTs.

		MsDP has been designed primarily to address the developmental gaps/deficits 
	in identified backward minority concentration areas by topping up of existing 
	Centrally Sponsored Schemes of various Central ministries/departments without any 
	change in the norms, guidelines and the funding pattern.

		The projects considered are additional class rooms, laboratories, school 
	buildings, hostels, toilets, buildings for Polytechnics, ITIs, Community Health 
	Centres, Primary Health Centres / Sub-centres, Anganwadi Centres, Rural Housing etc.

		In addition to gap filling projects, MsDP also provides for taking up 
	innovative projects which are not covered by any of the existing CSS of various 
	ministries and these are funded in the ratio of 60:40 and for NE and Hilly States 
	at 90:10 between the Centre and States. This includes Sadbhav Mandap, Market shed etc.

Implementation of Scheme: 

      ->Overall implementation: The Committee noted that although the Ministry has revised 
		the scheme, the socio-economic conditions of the minorities remain unchanged.
		There were significant trends of missing basic amenities/ infrastructure in 
		minority areas.  The Committee recommend that the Ministry should co-ordinate
		with the concerned states/ union territories and other line Ministries to 
		complete these incomplete projects in a timely manner and make efforts for 
		better implementation of the scheme.   
 
      ->Data on beneficiaries: The Committee noted that there is no community-wise data 
		regarding the number of families benefited by the projects under the scheme.
		In the absence of such data, the Ministry cannot analyse the impact of the 
		scheme on minorities.  The Committee requested for updated data starting
		from 2008-09.
 
      ->Housing:The Committee observed that provision of pucca housing in rural areas under
		the Indira Awas Yojana (IAY) was one of the priority sectors of the MsDP 
		during the 11th and 12th Five Year Plan.  However, no units were sanctioned 
		under IAY in several states during the Plan periods (including Kerala, Assam,
		Jammu & Kashmir, and Andaman and Nicobar Islands).The Committee also observed 
		that projects relating to drinking water supply and pucca housing have not
		been included in the restructured MsDP, despite housing being a basic 
		infrastructure for the people living in minority areas.  It recommended that
		projects under IAY and drinking water supply be included in the list of
		priority sectors of MsDP.

      ->Educational projects: The Committee noted that several education-related projects were
		sanctioned during the 11th and 12th Plan, but have not been completed.The 
		Committee stated that the Ministry should make efforts to complete these
		pending projects without further delay.  It also asked for community-wise
		details of beneficiaries of the education projects to be provided to the
		Committee. 
 
      ->Health-related projects: With regard to health projects, the Ministry undertakes 
		construction of Primary Health Centres (PHCs), Health Sub-Centres, and 
		labour rooms in PHCs.  Out of a total of 4,393 units/projects sanctioned in
		11th and 12th Plan Period, only 2,432 projects/units were completed.The 
		Committee emphasised that health of the people is one of the basic indicators
		of development of an area, and recommended that the Ministry should take steps
		with the Health Ministry and state governments, to ensure completion of the
		projects.  
 
      ->Low utilisation of funds: The Committee noted that state-wise utilisation of funds 
		under the scheme was low due to various reasons, including: (i) long gestation
		period of some projects, (ii) non-availability of land, (iii) cost escalation,
		and (iv) delay in transfer of funds by the states implementing agencies.
		It recommended that the Ministry should tackle these issues at the various
		levels with the state governments and other Ministries to ensure full 
		utilisation of funds.
 
      ->Monitoring of scheme: The Committee noted that despite having several monitoring
		mechanisms, the impact of MsDP is hardly visible in the minority areas. It
		stated that the monitoring of projects under the scheme should be done by
		independent monitors once a year, and across states.  Further, their reports
		should be uploaded on the scheme website.